---
author: Chris Parnin
category: General
draft: false
image:
  alt: ''
  src: ''
publishDate: '2013-12-03'
snippet: ''
tags:
- research
- programming
title: 'Software Engineering: The Next 50 Years'
---
It is not unreasonable to speculate on what the future of software engineering will look like in the next 50 years. Software engineering is still a young discipline, with almost half a century since the coining of ["software engineering"](http://bertrandmeyer.com/2013/04/04/the-origin-of-software-engineering/). Although we could claim some sort of success by simply pointing out the software underlying almost every facet of today’s world, that success has not been consistently repeatable nor teachable. As we become dependent on trillions of lines of code in the next 50 years, there is little comfort we still have <a href="http://www.third-bit.com/2012/12/06/two-solitudes-illustrated.html">no fundamental scientific understanding</a> of how to create software.

> **TL;DR** This post will speculate on possible directions and the challenges faced by the research and software engineering community that need to start now in order to be relevant tomorrow. Read on for brains, massive engineering, and potty-training your programs…

---

## A different kind of engineering

Many of the challenges faced by humanity in the next decades will require software that works at completely different scales and completely different constraints than today’s software. Previously, we’ve been able to make the <a href="http://www.genesishistory.org/content/ProfPapers/PgmgInLargeSmall-Kron.pdf">distinction</a> between _programming-in-the-large_ and _programming-in-the-small_, when reasoning about the size of teams and types of tools needed to build software. While software continues to fit these situations, it is already diverging from these categories in several ways.

### Massively distributed software engineering

> To meet the grand challenges of humanity, we will have to learn to massively scale software development in entirely new ways or die trying.

The development of the Large Hadron Collider’s core software system spanned over two decades, with <a href="http://www.coverity.com/company/press-releases/read/cern-chooses-coverity-to-ensure-accuracy-of-large-hadron-collider-software-html">over 50 million lines of code</a>. Given enough time and dedication, we can create successfully massively large software systems.

But, we also may be reaching our limit given our current methods and capabilities. In the United States, the recent software behind the health care insurance marketplace is a <a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/21/us/insurance-site-seen-needing-weeks-to-fix.html?pagewanted=all&_r=1&">reported</a> 500 million lines of code.

In the next 50 years, as governments increasingly turn legal policy and services into source code and public APIs, often created in the timespan of a president’s term, we must be prepared to build massively-sized software systems on a regular basis. This will often require cooperation of many diverse stakeholders.

At our current pace, imagine how these would fare if needed in a few years:

- A government API to calculate taxes on all online purchases for any location?
- A distributed traffic regulation system for a network of self-driving cars and drones.
- A planetary asteroid deflector system in response to an <a href="http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/11/21/us-space-mining-asteroids-idUSBRE9AK0JF20131121">asteroid mining</a> operation gone horribly wrong?

### Long-tail engineering

> Billions of disposable apps are created; most are used a few days.

As infrastructure for hosting data and software drops near zero, many instances of software can be created in a few hours, potentially scaling to millions of users, then discarded a few days later.

The primary challenge for this type of developer will be not in creation of the software but the management of its ecosystem: rapid iteration, instant distribution, insightful monitoring.

### 15 minutes of fame

> Almost every developer creates an app with 15 million users one time in their career

For those seeking a more noble opportunity, there are currently about <a href="http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9240676/India_to_overtake_U.S._on_number_of_developers_by_2017">18 million developers</a> in the world with a population of over 7 billion, many living in extreme poverty. As the world slowly crawls out of poverty and gains access to second-hand and cheap technology, what can a few developers <a href="http://blogs.worldbank.org/ic4d/harnessing-transformative-power-technology-end-poverty">build for billions by 2030</a>?

### Software Archaeology

> Software running behind much of the world’s infrastructure celebrate their first century of uptime.

Like old Roman aqueducts and roads still in use today, some software essentially becomes eternal, even as the languages, tools, and people behind them are long gone. Other projects—massive in scale—but unable to amass collective resources, must instead plod along over decades. Current research ideas: Reverse-engineering, mining software repositories techniques, program understanding tools may not be enough to ensure the longevity or recovery of knowledge.

*Hat tip to Adrian Kuhn and Spencer Rugaber*

### Neural-embodied and augmented programming

> If today’s developer must know touch interfaces, tomorrow’s must know brain interfaces.

In the next 50 years, software development will have to account for the increased stressors on human's mental capabilities. The increased complexity and scale of massive software, new domains, and inaccessibility of century-old software bump up against fundamental limitations in a human’s cognitive abilities. Age, its discriminatory counterpart, ageism, and <a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18054866">memory decline</a> have been ever-present stressors—as Neil Stephenson puts it: _"Software development, like professional sports, has a way of making thirty-year-olds feel decrepit."_

Putting extreme measures aside (instead of botox injections, some opt for yearly <a href="http://www.cell.com/cell-stem-cell/retrieve/pii/S1934590911005807">remyelination</a> in Korea), developers will seek passive ways to enhance and augment their programming abilities using passive enhancers (caffeine++, TMS, nootropics) and choose from the many devices that offer neural and biological sensors (EEG, MEG, EMG, fNIR, pupillometry, galvanic skin response, image-based affective state). A common form factor, **Second skulls**, is used as part of their daily job (see <a href="http://www.gizmag.com/smartcap-measures-fatigue-brain-waves/21271/">SmartCaps</a>, <a href="http://www.popsci.com/technology/article/2013-01/darpas-2013-wish-list-robotic-dive-doctor-portable-brain-reading-and-gravity-vision">Darpa’s wish list</a>). These devices are capable of delivering localized transcranial magnetic stimulation pulses that can prime and enhance particular brain regions and sensing verbal formations, mental imagery, mental load, alertness, and general brain state. The sensed signals further serve as feedback and input into the programming process as well as other tools, visualizations, and collected meta-data. Not only will developers need these devices, they will support other types of knowledge workers needing to use these tools as part of their work.

The pervasiveness of caffeine, growing population of students and programmers willing to experiment with brain-altering pharmaceuticals, complexity of software, increased global competition, and extended working years lends itself to a high probability of adoption by many.

_On a darker note, crimes of the future will be tried based on **brain prints**, activity in the hippocampus triggered by crime scene recognition. Also, Gattaca sorting hats._

### Programming-in-the-near and far

As software continues to displace entire industries and professions, <a href="http://www.pbs.org/newshour/businessdesk/2013/07/should-we-fear-the-end-of-work.html">many workers</a> may seek new opportunities of work in localized and specialized markets. As just one example, see the quick emergence of driving services such as Uber and Lyft. With <a href="http://readwrite.com/2012/10/24/cant-make-the-meeting-send-your-robot-instead#awesm=~ooTT9KEyiplwsb">telepresence devices</a> and rise of <a href="http://37signals.com/remote/">remote working</a>, the distinction between near and far may blur.

### Designer software

> Some developers will cater to a single user that will pay $$$ for designer software.

Designer development contends with game development as an enticing prospect for young ones entering the software industry. Designer software blends entertainment, hobbyists, fashion, home decor, and personal branding. Imagine the many retiring Silicon millionaires that want the opulence of Bill Gates’ home automation, also extended to their hobbies and fashion: <a href="http://gopro.com/videos/bike/">insane biking gear</a>, <a href="http://www.ics.uci.edu/~sunyp1/Downloads/p2543-park.pdf">smart bags</a> and <a href="http://readwrite.com/2010/04/13/10_smart_clothes_youll_soon_be_wearing">clothes</a>.

### Software trainers (data engineers)

> Software trainers, show programs how to exist in our world.

Adam Lally gave <a href="http://www.sigsoft.org/fse20/keynote.html">a keynote</a> describing the design and development of the Watson system. An interesting takeaway was that most of the engineering effort was not **software-engineering** as much as **data-engineering**: data cleaning, feature extraction, data manipulation and massaging, and manual data source selection and training.

Classic software engineers tell programs what objects they would see, in exact shape, color, and orientation. They state exact sequence of actions, what to say, and sometimes even how to clean up after themselves.

**Software trainers**, show programs how to exist in our world, train them, and teach them how to learn on their own. They give the programs the basics on how to recognize objects, but the programs must learn how to put the pieces together. Programs will learn actions through feedback and digital playgrounds, be fluent in multiple languages, visualizations, and sonifications and be potty trained at an early age. Software trainers don’t need to understand machine learning techniques, but apply them: Think the next step beyond <a href="http://jalopnik.com/ask-a-google-street-view-driver-anything-you-want-573386321">google street view drivers</a>.

---
## Engineering tomorrow

There is already research in place for some of this future, while other research is just beginning. The following research areas will be essential for the future of software engineering in the next 50 years that I have been personally examining.

### Neuroscience of Programming

Previously, you may have seen some of the techniques I’ve used to study [interruptions of programmers](http://blog.ninlabs.com/2013/01/programmer-interrupted/). [Several colleagues](http://www.infosun.fim.uni-passau.de/spl/janet/fMRI/fMRIPoster.pdf) and I have already starting exploring how more techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), electroencephalography (EEG), functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIR), and other techniques that can yield insights into the inner workings of a programmer’s mind.

Understanding how programming works in the brain is not limited to theory building, but can have real downstream effects in improving education, training, and the design and evaluation of tools and languages for programmers. Finally, by understanding what it takes to program, better enhancers and sensors can be constructed in support of augmented programming.

Some near term questions:

* Can we finally validate and quantify the idea of “programmer’s flow”?
* What parts of the brain are uniquely activated during programming?
* How should software companies really interview software developers?
* Does teaching particular concepts such as design patterns change the way people fundamentally understand code?

### Crowd Programming
The software development community has been steadily creating software and tools that allow developers to coordinate on increasingly larger scales. One example of an emergent form of crowd programming comes from the language that everyone loves to hate: Javascript. Rather than having a rich standard API, Javascript essentially has a “crowd API” assembled from Stack Overflow snippets and Github repositories.

Previously, we’ve studied how [crowd documentation](http://blog.ninlabs.com/crowd-documentation/), knowledge created via blog posts and Stack Overflow, for better or worse is increasingly becoming [consulted over official documentation](http://blog.ninlabs.com/api-documentation/). We’ve found:

* Developers may be getting as much as 50% of their documentation from Stack Overflow.
* More examples can be found on Stack Overflow than the official documentation guide.
* In web searches, Stack Overflow questions are visited 2x-10x more often than official documentation.

I believe that continuing to study and expand the capabilities of crowd-levels of development not only will better situate us to tackle massive software challenges, but enable long-tail developers to quickly create software for reuse and remix of other developer’s efforts. The techniques used to automatically mine, collate, and extract knowledge from online archives will become invaluable for developers having to maintain century-old software.

We already see tools inspired by these principles: [Codetrails](http://www.codetrails.com/), [SnipMatch](http://www.codetrails.com/blog/snipmatch-code-snippets-world), [SourceGraph](https://sourcegraph.com/).

Some near term questions:

* Has Stack Overflow saved billions of dollars in programmer productivity?
* What interactions and incentives will encourage developers to contribute in the workplace?
* Colony collapse: How do you sustain crowd efforts and participation in software?
* How do we automatically mine, aggregate, curate development knowledge from repositories, sites, posts?

### Workplace of Tomorrow
Many have dreamed of better programming environments. I believe smart desks, tabletops, gestures ([see CodeSpace](http://kenhinckley.wordpress.com/2011/11/13/paper-codespace-touch-air-gesture-hybrid-interactions-for-supporting-developer-meetings/)) will vastly improve in the future office. Still, I have seen far too many smart whiteboards, ambient displays, and other devices sit unused in professional developer settings.

More importantly, we need to rethink what interactions and tasks related to programming that need extra support in an expanded [interaction space](https://chrisparnin.me/pdf/codepad.pdf). There has been a recent resurgence in the redefining of expressiveness in programming and the idea of [“live programming”](http://liveprogramming.github.io/liveblog/2013/01/a-history-of-live-programming/index.html), and [“live coding”](http://toplap.org/). These approaches might make the use of the surrounding physical environment more appealing for augmenting and providing feedback for the developer.

We initially created the first international LIVE programming workshop [LIVE 2013](http://liveprogramming.github.io/2013/program.html), to help crystalize these ideas, but that’s just a start.

## Conclusion

Start engineering tomorrow, today. Also please contribute your own vision and ideas below (or email)!

### Reader comments

Archived responses from readers (from disqus):

#### Adrian Kuhn

I really like your cyberpunkian take on body-modifications for developers and the very Gibsonian idea of designer software. Here's me quick 25-minute braindumping on the next 50 years.

— I claim that the technical challenges of building software systems are solved by today. What remains are the organizational challenges. Even though decentralized, evolutionary approaches are better to build software, we'll keep trying (and failing) to build huge centralized systems. Take the current health care website of the US government: It is not hard to build a website but it is hard to build anything as a monolithic centralized singular organization. The next 50 years will same many many more health care websites.

— Text is here to stay. The main interface of programming will remain text. And as more people learn how to code at elementary school textual interfaces will become even more common in end user software. There will be some limited spatial interfaces, like spread sheets, but the main behavior will always be captured in blobs of source code. When the Internet was new in 1995 people thought that you'd navigate it as a huge spatial map, but it turned out the most natural model to navigate the web is a command line. In the same way, as more people learn how to code, blobs of source code will be everywhere.

— Robots. Robots. Robots. Robotics will be so big that it will do to mobile what mobile did to desktop. And these robots will be programmed with languages and tools that cater to the thinking loop experience of cyber-physical live programming.

#### Ian Sommerville

Chris

I thought this was an interesting list - looking ahead 50 years is a pretty bold thing to do and I suspect that some of the things you suggest will happen sooner than you might think.

Personally, I don't think development will scale with huge teams (there has no evidence that large teams have ever worked - successful open source systems are controlled by small groups). Rather, scaling will be through massive reuse at the systems level.

I really like your idea of 'designer software' - with the interesting consequence that there could be 'fake software' which is close to the original but without the designer badge.

Neural embodied programming I don't know anything about but I'm sure that you're right about the inevitability of direct brain/computer interfaces.

The only prediction which I think you've got wrong is '15 minutes of fame'.

Remember Sturgeon's Law - "90% of everything is crap" - it applies to apps too and most apps will continue to be derivative, buggy and uninteresting to anyone except their developer and maybe their friends.

Re the comment below on TDD. TDD doesn't work for computationally-intensive systems (running a test may take an hour) nor is it cost effective if you build systems from external services that you have to pay for on a usage basis. TDD is an important development but isn't the 'silver bullet' of software engineering. You are right, however, in saying that it should be an essential skill for graduates.

#### Allan Kelly

A little mundane perhaps but a lot closer to know. I believe we are living through a change in coding practices, namely Test Driven Development. As a profession programmers are learning - or perhaps relearning - how to write unit tests, how to automate them and how to use tests to drive design.

Unit testing has long existed, talk to old Cobol hands and it was common in the 70's. My generation of programmers - those of us who learned to program on ZX81s and BBCs skipped it. Since about 2000 the industry has been relearning.

With modern technology and tools TDD is Unit Testing on steroids, doing it fast changes it, it becomes a design tool.
I believe that by 2020 it will be difficult, if not impossible, to get a job as a professional programmer if you do not practice TDD, i.e. test first automated unit testing.

Unfortunately most of the recent graduates I meet are not being taught this skill. Some of the (better) colleges do. By 2020 any college that wants employable graduates will have to.

#### Paul W. Homer

I'm kinda hoping that it plays out like this:

https://theprogrammersparadox.blogspot.com/2009/04/end-of-coding-as-we-know-it.html

But my real expectation is that it'll take over a hundred years to get there. At the rate we are going now, in fifty years software will have so strangled modern society that most people will revert to living in caves, just to avoid the pain :-)

Paul.